Does bear taste good?
>> Yeah, it's very beef like in texture.
Um, it's phenomenal. At some levels,
there's a cultural taboo around it. Um,
as you'll see, like Florida right now is
running a very controversial black bear
hunt. Um, people get worked up about it.
Uh, but yeah, it's an excellent food. It
was a very prized food at the time.
Another business that Daniel Boone was
into was producing a product called bare
bacon, which was consumed domestically.
Oh. But um yes, smoked bacon. It would
be plausible that Ben Franklin, he could
have walked down to a market in
Philadelphia and he would have been able
to purchase bear bacon or smoked black
bear hams. It was a very popular food
item. Um bear can carry trickos. Most
cases of tricknosis in the US today do
not come from hogs. Mostly comes from
black bear. You have to cook it. So for
that reason, a lot of people have an
idea that it should be avoided. Um, but
we we my family, we eat prodigious
amounts of it.
>> Wow. I I want to can I come by sometime
and uh have some bear bacon or bear
steak or whatever.
[music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLots podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway
>> and [clears throat] I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> Joe, I have a uh pop quiz on American
history for [music] you.
>> Oh god.
>> Are you ready?
>> Go on. Who was Daniel Boone?
>> Did he have like a hat that was cool? He
was like I just think it was like
someone
>> a a raccoon hat. Yes,
>> a raccoon hat. And he was probably an
outdoors guy who probably didn't hang
out in cities very much. So
>> that's what I think of that's besides
the hat and imagining him out in the
wilderness somewhere. I have no I don't
know what year he lived in anything
beyond that. Maybe 1800s. I don't know.
So, the one fact that you know about um
Daniel Boone is actually I think
contested whether [laughter] or not he
he actually wore the raccoon cap. Um but
do you know what he was doing when he
was outdoors?
>> No. No, I
>> he was hunting.
>> Okay, I guess I could have guessed that.
I would have guessed that.
>> He was something called a long hunter. I
don't know what that is. He went on
really long expeditions to hunt. Do you
know what he was hunting?
>> Nope. Raccoons.
>> No, apparently not. um deer,
>> okay,
>> white-tailed deer. And this is something
that I think, you know, everyone has
heard the name Daniel Boone, but almost
no one can actually remember him
>> what he was doing.
>> And people also forget that, you know, a
lot of American history is built not on
manufacturing and farming necessarily,
but on hunting.
>> I don't have we ever done a hunting
episode?
>> We haven't. And I find I find this
whole, you know, part of US history so
fascinating and it actually really is
intertwined with even how we think about
money. So, do you know where the term a
buck came from? Lend me a buck, give me
a buck.
>> Well, now I imagine it's probably from a
deer or whatever, but had it not been
for this intro in the context, I
actually would have had no idea.
>> Yeah. So, hunting is actually embedded
in the way we talk about money. So, um,
that's what we're going to be talking
about today.
>> I can't wait. A whole new avenue for us.
>> Uh, and I have to say, just on a
personal note, um, something has
happened to me recently, which is I have
completely flipped on deer. I used to
like them. I used to look out the window
and be like, "Oh, these graceful
animals. Aren't they beautiful?" But as
of a week ago, they ate my entire newly
planted garden, and I hate them.
>> Yeah. I get the impression that a lot of
people um their view of deer flips
pretty quickly when they're actually
living in a location where they're
prevalent. Like it's like, "Oh, they're
cute. Maybe you saw a movie about them
or something like that." It's like, "Oh,
who wants to hunt the deer?" And then
you confront them and you're like,
"Maybe we need a little bit of um
population management, so to speak, um
the deer community."
>> So, uh my solution to this problem, I
don't hunt personally. The only thing I
hunt is like leftover Thanksgiving
pumpkins on my property, which we target
shoot. But, uh, we have a friend who
loves to hunt.
>> Yeah.
>> And so, he's going to be on our property
hunting deer for the next two months.
And if you want some fresh venison, I
do,
>> then let me know.
>> Have you have you arranged a deal with
him where he can keep as much as you
want? Like, do does he tithe you 20% or
whatever it is?
>> Uh, he pays us in meat. Yeah.
>> Which is actually great at the moment
because beef prices are so insane.
>> You're so lucky. your coal and your
meat, your Yeah. Anyway,
>> I'm blessed in natural resources just
like America.
>> That's right.
>> All right. Well, I'm happy to say we
have the perfect guest to talk about all
of this. Uh someone who I'm very excited
to be talking to actually. We have
Steven Reanella. He is the author and
founder of Meat Eater and knows all
about hunting and all about this
particular aspect of US economic
history. So, Steve, welcome to the show.
>> Hey, thank you for having me on. I'm uh
I'm dying to jump in and offer a few
clarifications and corrections on our
friend Daniel Boon. When you're ready,
>> why don't we just start? Tell us
everything we got wrong in the intro.
Just go for it.
>> Yeah. Uh yeah, Boon Boon did not like
skin caps. Uh was it that was a
thing that was added on later through
through Disney depictions. Boon wore a
widebrimmed hat made from beaver wool
felt which is still the
material of choice for high-end cowboy
hats. Raccoons
uh there was a commodity for a long time
in in in different tallows and greases.
They used to hunt raccoons and possums
and actually render the oil from them.
Just as an example, I'm holding in my
hand right now a one quart jar of
rendered grease, which I made for a
buddy of mine just as a
>> What do you actually What do you do with
that? Can you make candles?
>> Well, I haven't done anything with it.
Yeah. Oh, yeah. You definitely make soap
candles. You can cook with it. Um, in
fact, when the English were first
strategizing around establishing their
first colony in the New World, and they
had a sort of a list of of ways that
they might monetize this colony, on that
list was like animal oils, animal
greases. So, yeah. Boon was a deer was
in the deer skin trade, but he also was
in the bare grease trade and the the the
animal oil trade. um as was Dave
Crockett who wore the skin cap but
was kind of mocked by his contemporaries
but he was a showboat and he wore it as
a sort of [laughter]
he he wore it like uh to sort of to to
create this atmosphere of this every
man's backwoodsman but it wasn't
regarded as a practical hat
draw attention to himself he was a
showboat Crockett was a showboat Boon
was a professional I love the idea of
all these like manly pioneering hunters
critiquing each other's outfits. I also
like the idea I also like the idea of
like oh when hunters get together they
argue about are you a Daniel Boon man or
a Davy Crock oh your guy was a total
showboat he was a fraud no one would
have ever worn that hat and the other
like oh no he did this
>> yeah my dear friend who I'm giving that
one of my jars of grease to uh he
is a Crockett man and I'm a boon man
[laughter]
>> we fight about this all the time
>> I'm a boon
>> the other thing is one one last comment
just to get caught Keep going.
>> You were
>> Were you to formalize Were you to
formalize the arrangement with your deer
hunter?
>> Mhm.
>> If you were to formalize that
arrangement where there was a expected
quidd proquo around deer meat for
access, you would be in violation of the
law. You need to keep it nonformalized.
>> Oh, okay.
>> Gift him. You can gift him access. He
can gift you meat. But the minute you
formalize that transaction, you would be
commodifying wild game meat, which is
illegal in this country.
>> Tracy just admitted to a crime.
>> No, no. I She was
>> I've already reported her.
>> I specifically said, "We don't have a
formal agreement. We're trading
informally."
>> This is I've already learned so much on
this. I've like if we ended the episode
right here, I would have like learned so
many more things that I didn't know when
I woke up this morning.
>> You'd be looking for a new co-host
because [laughter] you'd be locked up.
Would you be literally imprisoned for
accepting venison?
>> Okay. Well, let's not stop here. Let's
keep going. Um, Steve, you know, you
mentioned that uh when England was
colonizing the US, one of the big draws
was animal grease and animal products.
talk to us a little bit more because I
think when people think about the
colonization of the new world, a lot of
people think about tobacco and farming
and agriculture, but hunting and animal
products were actually a really big part
of it
>> in the early colonial period. Um, one of
our biggest ports was, you know, coming
out of Charleston, out of South
Carolina. So at a time in the in the
late colonial period, so prior to the
Revolutionary War, deer skins in in in
value and economic value,
white-tailed deer skins were were the
the second largest commodity coming out
of the out of the colonies. The first
one being rice. So the animal grease
thing was a thing, but but it was
dwarfed by the deer skin trade. If you
look at these old paintings you see of
of like, you know, the king of England
around the time of the colonial period,
you'll sometimes notice that they're
wearing a white breach or a white pant,
a seeming white pant. That's buckskin.
Um, buckskin was used as work wear, but
it was also something that the a that
the that the affluent individuals wore,
those white breaches, those white
buckskin pants. It was it was preferred
a preferred material for clothing
making. Um there's a historian uh uh
Mack Farraer
and he wrote a piece about the early
colonial period and he remarked that
like among among colon colonial
Americans so Euroamerican colonial
Americans and Native Americans alike
black bear meat was the food of choice.
Deer deer skin was the material of
choice. So they were hunting bears that
was that was the good stuff to eat. deer
were what you made your clothes from.
>> I'm surprised about the bear meat. Does
bear taste good?
>> Yeah, it's very beef like in texture. Um
it's phenomenal. It some levels there's
a cultural taboo around it. Um as you'll
see like Florida right now um is running
a very controversial black bear hunt. Um
people get worked up about it. Uh but
yeah, it's an excellent food. It was a
very prized food at the time. Another
business that Daniel Boone was into was
providing was producing a product called
bare bacon which was consumed
domestically. But um yes, smoked bacon.
It would be plausible that Ben Franklin,
he could have walked down to a market in
Philadelphia and he would have been able
to purchase bear bacon or smoked black
bear hams. It was a very popular food
item. Um bear can carry tricknosis. Most
cases of tricknosis in the US today do
not come from hogs. Mostly comes from
black bear. You have to cook it. So for
that reason, a lot of people have an
idea that it should be avoided. Um but
we we my family we eat prodigious
amounts of it.
>> Wow. I I want to can I come by sometime
and uh have some bear bacon or bear
steak or whatever?
>> Anytime, man. Anytime. I would I will
cook it. I will cook it for you and I
can fry you some up in bare grease if
you'd like. I think let's do a video
series. Let's go. Let's go on the road.
>> Um before I I have I already have like a
million questions. Can we just back up a
second? Like for the listeners, can you
tell us your story a little bit? Why are
we why are we talking to you? What's
your uh what's your background?
>> Oh, so yeah, I g I grew up um in in
Michigan. I was born into a hunting
family. That was kind of our identity. U
my father was a very avid hunter. He
came home from World War II and uh just
hunted and and I was brought up around
it. Uh
I pursued a career first in trapping
throughout high school. I was convinced
I was going to be a fur trapper. Um
I became interested in writing. I went
to graduate school for for writing. Um
starting in in 2000 when I finished
school, I became a professional long
form magazine writer. started doing
books and all my stuff has always been
in the outdoor space. Um eventually
got into television, started doing a
show called Meeater and and we turn
Meeater into a full-fledged business. We
have a media arm where I spend the bulk
of my time, but we also work in and we
have a lot of consumer products. We have
four outdoor gear companies which which
live under the meat eater umbrella and
and um and I've kind of I intended to
make a living in the outdoors when I was
a kid and I
mostly succeeded at that. I spent a lot
I get to spend a lot of time outdoors
and I get to spend a lot of time
thinking about um issues of how hunting
plays into contemporary American culture
and how hunting shaped our country and
shaped our our national experience.
Yeah, I got to plug um Steve's I think
it's an audible series um on like the
history of hunting in the US where
there's a whole episode on long hunters
that I've been listening to. Also one on
like Buffalo in the 1800s. They're
really good.
>> Yeah, it's called Meate Eaters American
History and it's a audio original
through uh uh Random House Penguin. Um
and we've done three so far on different
different commodity trades in American
history all around wildlife. So, one
thing that I did learn from the um
audible series on long hunters is the
American hunting system in the sort of
1600s, 1700s when colonials started
coming over to what would become the
United States was very different to how
hunting was done in Europe. Right? In in
Europe, hunting was like the purview of
land owners and rich people. But in
America, I guess there were no no rules
and everyone could hunt animals.
>> Yeah. Uh, you know, a good way to think
about it, I often remind people to think
back to certain details of the Robin
Hood story where
you have the king's deer. Okay. And and
part of Robin Hood's gig, right, is
he'll go hunt on the king's estate to
get venison, which he would then
distribute to the poor. It's part of the
Robin Hood narrative. So yeah, in in
England and in Western Europe by that
point, um things were heavily developed.
Most the the woods, the wilderness was
gone. Having access to wild landscapes
was something that was relegated only to
the most wealthy. Um you could be have
your eyes gouged out. You could be
executed for hunting animals that were
the the that belong to the aristocracy.
So when American colonists started
showing up like Boone's family came from
England, they did not arrive here as
hunters. They did not arrive with a
hunting background. They adopted it. Uh
the colonists
like Boon's family for instance, they
they were Quakers. His his people were.
But the American colonists were as
impacted by Native Americans as Native
Americans were impacted by American
colonists. You could see it in Boone's
dress. He would plate his hair. He would
braid his hair. He would grease his hair
with bear grease. He would wear
buckskin. He would hunt the animals that
Native Americans taught him to hunt. He
would cook them in that way. He would
make his clothes in that way. So they
adopted hunting as a way to make a
living on the American landscape. Some
of them were farmers through and
through. Some became hunters through and
through. Uh and they were they were at
odds. The the these hunting people,
these kind of wild men like Boone in the
colonial period would always be hovering
at the western edge of colonial
expansion.
The that England
would try to re in these American
colonists. they would feel that they
were kind of drifting too far out of
colonial influence. And these American
colonists like Boone who were hunting
for a living would cause a lot of
tension with Native Americans. And so
the colonial powers didn't like these
guys living this this frontier wild
existence because again they were
drifting away from the crown and they
were causing animosity with Native
Americans who had then blamed the
English for these incursions onto their
landscape. So, it was it was it was like
a rich kind of area of of of adoption of
a wilderness aesthetic while still
trying to live, you know, under colonial
rule in the in Boone's early days.
>> I recently You are you watching the um
the new Ken Burns documentary at all?
>> No, but everyone else is. It seems like
I'm going to
>> I started uh I've watched the first
episode so far and it's just interesting
because obviously
um you know the version of independence
that we learned about in school was just
incredibly simplified and this idea that
there really were all different kinds of
tensions between the colonists and the
sort of norms and the laws and the rules
of the old country are really striking.
I hadn't really appreciated this
dimension before about the hunting, but
I think it, you know, it really shows
how I guess from day one there was a
certain democratic element of colonial
society that sounds very distinctly
different from where they were coming
from.
>> Yeah. And there's an interesting passage
where Washington, George Washington,
criticizes
folks like Boon, he criticizes these
frontier individuals that are making
that are living off the land out on the
frontier and market hunting. He
criticizes them because he feels like a
a tip of the hat would push them over to
the Spanish or whoever like whatever col
whatever other colonial entity was out
there. he did not feel that they were
adequately American. And then and then
as much as Boone has been adopted,
there's one one guy joke that Boon has
become an honorary founding father. Um,
as much as Boone has been adopted as
this American icon, Boon and his
contemporaries, so again speaking of
these long hunters, these colonial white
skit white tail deer skin hunters, um,
they would not have identified as
American uh, loosely, but but they would
identified in family clans and they were
not what you would call if you look at
around the revolutionary period, you
would not refer to these guys as
patriots. They were opportunists and
they were mostly beholden to small
villages
made up of people they were related to
these networks. That was their
allegiance.
>> Didn't Boone actually end up striking a
deal with the Spanish for land? That's
one thing I learned from the series.
>> Yeah. Again, like the same way like he's
an honorary founding father. Boon was
fed up with So Boon in some ways is the
father of Kentucky. He was not the
first, but one of the first people to go
through this thing called the Cumberland
Gap and and start hunting in in what is
now Kentucky. Uh he got fed up with the
government there. He got fed up with
America. Um before, you know, when Spain
had the Louisiana territory, Spain was
trying to fill the place up. He struck a
deal with Boone and his people where
they would become subjects of the
Spanish crown in exchange for money. And
so Boon moved out and he moved west of
the Missouri River and became a Spanish
subject. Uh he swore that he would never
step foot back in Kentucky again when
Boone died. So Boon lived through the
Louisiana Purchase and became again an
American just through the fact that that
America bought the Louisiana Purchase.
He died and was buried in Missouri and
was later exumed and brought back to
Kentucky. Even though in his lifetime he
said, "I'll never step foot back there."
So people like to say Missouri has his
heart, meaning his soft tissues,
Kentucky has his bones. And there's like
this little ongoing dispute about
whether or not they really dug up the
right guy and rearied him. But yeah,
Boon willfully
left American rule to go live under a
different crown. Um he again he was
married to the hunt and he was married
to his family clan. That was how he
identified.
>> That's super interesting. What Tell me
about a long hunt. What are the
logistics? Sounds difficult. What are
the logistics of a long hunt?
>> Yeah, the logistics of a long hunt. It
was very decentralized. Um unlike if we
if we have time and we get into the
beaverkin trade of these American icons
like Jim Bridger, Jed Smith, John
Coulter, these guys that were engaged in
the Rocky Mountain beaver trade which
was very formalized, very top down. The
long hunter area, so this colonial deer
skin hunting area was very
decentralized. A group of long hunters
were probably, you know, mostly family
networks. Um, so it' be maybe a
patriarch,
his kids,
his sons-in-law, okay, his cousins, and
they would embark on these very long
trips. Um, they would leave these
frontier colonial establishments, let's
say, the Yadkin Valley in North
Carolina. A ton of long hunters came out
of the Yadken Valley in North Carolina.
They would travel over the Appalachin
range and they would drop down into uh
Kentucky, portions of Tennessee, and
they would hunt deer skins. They might
be gone six months. I think Boon's
longest long hunt was two years. It was
all based off pack trains. So, they
would everything was based off of um
using horses to carry stuff. and they
would build up a year's worth of deer
skins. Um, in the winter the deer skins
weren't as valuable, so they'd switch
their efforts to beaver and otter
trapping. They would transport all those
deer skins back ac across the
Appalachian Divide and sell them. Um, a
good price, a way to think about it
again is they were worth about a dollar,
which was a lot of money back then. Um,
and they would they would be some would
go to tanneries in Philadelphia, Boston,
and New York, but the bulk would be
shipped to tanneries in England to be
turned into leather for making breaches
and gloves and and other high-end
items. And that was the economy. And
they had these were farming people, but
this was their only access to cash. Much
of what they did was was was black
market, to be honest with you. um in in
two ways. When they would cross the
Appalachins to go hunt, they were doing
it against the wishes of the crown,
which again did not want to antagonize
Native Americans because it caused
warfare and trouble. They were also
doing it in violation of Native American
claims to the land. So when they would
go into Kentucky, they were hunting on
say Shaune land. So they were sort of
doubly trespassing, but that's how they
that's how they made their living and it
allowed them to live very isolated
existences and it gave them a cash
economy so they could buy guns and other
things that they couldn't trade corn
for.
>> Wait, I'm going to take the bait on the
beaver trade that you just mentioned. So
talk to us how is that formalized and
how does it contrast with the long
hunters?
>> Yeah, the beaver skin trade had been
going for a long long time. So, you
know, when the Dutch first came to
Manhattan, one of the primary things
they were after is beaver skins. Uh,
beavers, it's it's surprisingly easy to
wipe them out. So, if you look at
American history from the colonial
period on, we kind of have a we had a
way because of unregulated trapping. We
had a way that we would that ahead of
civilization would mark a a depopulation
of beavers. So, if we fast forward up to
the Louiswis and Clark expedition, here
we do the Louisiana Purchase. Thomas
Jefferson dispatches the Louiswis and
Clark expedition to go find a to
hopefully find a a mostly water route to
the Pacific and also to look at natural
resource, you know, abundance, right?
Lewis and Clark come back and they
report mindboggling numbers of beavers
in the in the inner mountain west. All
right. Right away, right on their heels
goes a bunch of American trappers out to
explore this land and trade in beavers.
A beaver pelt was, you know, going for
maybe three bucks. That's more than
you'd make in a day as a laborer. It was
real money. But guys got onto it and
they formalized it and people would go
out and get investors. Okay, a a group
would go out and get investors. Well,
for instance, Aster, if you go to Aster
Place in New York, Aster was America's
first homemade millionaire. Aster's
first business was the Beaver Trade. All
right? So, guys would get investors.
They would run advertisements to hire
trappers. If you look at these really
famous mountain men like like for
instance Jim Bridger, these guys
answered an ad in a newspaper. They ran
an ad that was says looking for 100
enterprising young men. And these young
guys, some of them escaped indentured
servants, people running away from
apprentice ships would go hire on as a
fur brigade. and they would hire on as a
day rate and they would be backed by
financial backers and they would send
these young men out to the inner
mountain west to trap Beaver as a day
laborer right in time some of these guys
would spin off and do their own thing
and go independent but it was a very
formalized structure that was sending
these young men out to catch beaver in
order to bring them back and they would
be exported and turned into wool felt.
If you look back to like Abe Lincoln's
hat, okay, that Abe Lincoln didn't wear
a beaverwolf felt hat. He wore a silk
hat, which we'll get to. But that style
of hat was the rage in Europe. All
sophisticated men. Many, many poor
people who aspired to look more affluent
would wear one of these top hats. They
were made from beaver wool felt. So that
was a huge export industry coming out of
it. And again, it was it was it became
formalized. And what killed it is they
were too effective. Um, they were too
effective and they ran two things killed
the trade. One, they were running out of
beaver anyway. And then a fashion change
crashed the industry. And it was
probably a good thing that it did
because they may have pretty much
exterminated the animals from the
landscape. I probably got a little ahead
of you there, but
>> No, that's great. That's great.
Actually, the thing about the fashion
change reminds me of one of my all-time
favorite bubbles, market bubbles, which
was the ostrich feather bubble in the
1800s where women would want ostrich
feathers for their hats and they became
really really expensive and then the
bubble burst and all these ostrich
farmers uh mostly in Africa I think went
bust. They called the plener the plenery
trade and all kinds of shorebirds and
and um yeah it was a it's hard to
picture now that you could just without
regulation in coastal areas of the
country go hunt herand egrets to sell
the feathers to adorn hats. Hm. Well,
you know, it's funny when you think
about like conservation efforts or you
think about endangered species, all
these ideas feel very modern to me.
Like, you know, maybe they started
thinking about these things in the 19
like in my mind it's like people always
started thinking about this stuff in the
1970s or whatever. But obviously that's
not the case. How early on in the
process of the hunting or hunting
history did people start becoming aware
of the fact that without some sort of
regulation or laws or curbs that this
natural resources could could be
irreversibly depleted
surprisingly early and I I and I'll get
to some of the earliest examples but I
want to clarify what I think motivations
might have been. Some of the earliest
examples we see of a conservation
effort would even be in the colonial
period and that was trying to put some
parameters around deer hunting because
again these were valuable animals for
people to use for material. So when we
see people trying to get to put in
hunting seasons like not to kill them
when they're fawning when they're
dropping their fawns or put in
restrictions about outsiders coming in
to hunt, they probably weren't motivated
by some sort of environmental ethic.
They were motivated by guarding and
protecting a resource. When you start to
see an emergence of a real
uh more emotional,
spiritual,
environmental movement is in the late
1800s. And it is it its birth is this.
Its birth is is people gentleman hunters
such as Theodore Roosevelt. Okay? You
have these gentleman hunters that want
to connect to this piece of American
history or American culture, but they're
recognizing that unregulated hunting,
this unregulated market hunting that
we've been discussing is going to make
hunting impossible because these
unregulated commodity hunters are going
to drive everything to extinction. So in
order to save hunting, all right, in
order to save wildlife and save hunting,
which they recognized as a very
important piece of American culture,
they needed to sort of bifurcate
American hunting efforts into sport
hunting,
which was regulated and had an
environmental ethic or a conservation
ethic, and unregulated market hunting,
which is what we've been discussing. One
of the great ironies is this is one of
the earliest conservation organizations
that that that that Roosevelt was
involved in, involved in founding,
involved in running is called the Boone
and Crockett Club. And they're still a
major player in American conservation
today. What's ironic is the names Boon
and Crockett, which Americans today hear
and they think of hunting. But these
were just the kind of individuals that
the Boon and Crockett Club needed to
stop
in order to save American hunting was
these market hunters who were out there
doing nothing to compensate the American
people for the wildlife they were
taking. And they would kill it all and
once they killed it all, they'd move a
little bit west and kill all of that.
Um, and they about undid American
wildlife.
>> Yeah. So there's there's a tragedy of
the commons dynamic going on here where
you have this public resource which is
animals and if too many people tap into
it the public resource ceases to exist.
Can you talk a little bit about the
buffalo trade because I think this is
probably the biggest example of that
dynamic actually happening.
>> Yeah, it's the biggest most regrettable
example. And when I say it's
regrettable, it's because by this point
we knew, we meaning not you and me of
course, but we meaning
um newsreading
engaged, educated Americans knew where
this was headed. Okay? And and I'll back
up a little bit. So if we get to the
time of European contact in the new
world, there were maybe the fashionable
number today is somewhere around 30 to
40 million American bison or buffalo is
those words are the same thing. Uh 40
million to 30 million buffalo on the
American landscape. By the end of the
Civil War, they've been removed from the
eastern part of the country. Um so you
know at a time there would have been
Buffalo and New Orleans. There would
have been buffalo in present day
Washington DC. There would have been
buffalo in present day Nashville. All
those had been wiped out by hunters. At
the end of the Civil War, there's
probably about 15 million of them on the
Great Plains, which has always been the
nexus of the population. That was always
the the that's where the bulk of the
animals were. The country really turned
westward
after the Civil War. Um once the civil
once the south, you know, the the the
union was saved, we sent our army out to
pacify hostile tribes in the west and to
protect economic interests in the west.
And with that shift westward, we started
looking for leather resources out west.
And they identified this 15 million
buffalo. There was nothing special about
buffalo leather. There was just we had
an insatiable appetite for leather. What
became is we needed it to produce
industrial belting. Okay. Um leather
prices shot up. We were producing
industrial belting to drive the
industrial revolution and the animals
were just yet another source of leather.
But they could be gotten for no
investment. Okay. A buffalo hide, let's
say it's worth $3.50, 50 cents, $4.
Where the foreman at a tannery would
make $3.50 a day, but a buffalo hide
hunter could kill 20 or 30 buffalo a day
and sell the hides at $3.50 a piece. And
he didn't have to put any money into it.
You're not raising them. You're not
feeding them. It's totally different
than cattle. They're just out there.
>> I have to ask, is it true that like the
buffalo just stood there while the
hunters shot at them? Like they didn't
really understand? No. Okay. that that's
that's a way it it's not true. They were
just so good at what they did, they knew
how to make that happen. This is a this
is a complicated thing you get into
where you want to look at what they did
and you want to look at the atrocity of
what they did. And what it causes people
to miss is this is going to sound weird.
It causes people to miss the the
professionalism and skill set that goes
into this. Like a big part of my career
is reconciling the skill set, the
dedication, the bravery
against the atrocity, right? But no,
they wouldn't just stand there. These
guys were masters. They were experts at
what they did. And they knew how to get
that outcome. You would not go out and
get that same outcome. You would go out
and not get any. I don't mean to hack on
you.
>> I I have no doubt I would be unable to
shoot a buffalo. That's fine.
Not even I don't even mean you wouldn't
be able to get one because of emotional
or constraints. It's just like they were
so good. They were trained their whole
life to do this. They were too good. And
this is one of the most astounding
things is when they start really getting
after them around 1872. The market
really opens up in eastern in American
tanneries. The appetite for these
buffalo hides really opens up to where
they're like, "We'll take as many as we
can get."
that hits in 1872 and it coincides not
coincides it's it's subject to the fact
that the railroad hits Dodge City Kansas
okay the southern railroad hits Dodge
city Kansas so now you can load these
things on a train and send them to
tanneries by 187 by 1883
11 years later that 15 million animals
is gone
it's it compressed everything took
forever ever to almost wipe out beaver.
It took for hundreds of years to almost
wipe out whitetail deer. With the
buffalo, they were so good at it. And
the and the country was so primed
industrially, if that's a word,
industrially. We were so primed with
railroads, with big tanneries that were
the tannery buildings that were, you
know, a thousand yards long that we
could just bam burn through a resource
with astonishing quickness. And the
crazy part about it is once they shot
them out, it didn't even affect leather
prices. You like a buffalo hide at the
peak could be worth five bucks. So you
would think once they kill them all, the
market should spike, right? They're like
there's scarcity. The last ones were
selling at the same price as the first
ones because in the end it didn't
matter. They could buy cattle in South
America. They could get leather from
anywhere. So we killed them all. And it
wasn't like we it wasn't like we needed
them. It was a drop in the bucket for
leather production.
>> There was no market mechanism because
there was just so much abundant leather
from multiple sources. There was no
market mechanism curbing the hunters.
>> No, it was just
>> that's interesting.
>> They were worth what they were worth.
They were worth what a cowhide was
worth. It was just that they could get
them for free and when they got them, it
didn't affect anything. The industrial
revolution and leather belting was still
produced and still produced and still
produced. So it almost makes it seem
more shameful in the end that it would
be like we would have acco like the
country would have accomplished what we
accomplished with the industrial
revolution had we never even exploited
that resource
>> as f also I never really thought about I
never thought about any of this. I
certainly never thought about the
connection between the industrial
revolution. I just imagine these, you
know, sort of a ancient
uh factories with a bunch of wheels and
that and these belts that are pulling
the wheels and how that is connected to
I guess something had to be turning the
wheels. I just never really thought
about I never really thought about what
it was.
>> There's a great photo. It was later, you
know, it was later, but there's a great
photo and it's in a Ford manufacturing
plant and it's these lathing machines
and the photo explains that overhead
is 50 miles
overhead of the workers are 50 miles of
leather belting and these are 16inch
belts.
>> Wow. What why why do we we still what
happened such that ultimately we still
have bison? Um because the population
eventually, right? They didn't quite
kill them all and now we have we've
rebuilt the bison stock in the country.
What happened such that we didn't quite
go all the way and for completely make
this animal extinct?
>> I'm a little bit hesitant to say this
because it's when it comes to the
conservation history of America, it's a
little bit of an anomaly, but what
happened to save them is private
ownership. Um, we shot them all down to
the point where there was just a couple
scattered animals here and there. Um,
even at one time a guy named William T.
Hornadyay who was a who was a
taxiderermist and and a mammal expert,
he wrote letters around the country
trying to see who had a few. And there
was a handful of of eccentrics around
the country that had managed to go out
and rope some and save them, maybe even
feed them off domestic cows when they
were calves. And these kind of slowly
got brought into little herds. Uh,
interestingly, some got brought brought
to the Bronx Zoo when they started
trying to repopulate little protected
populations in the West. Another great
irony is they were moving animals from
the Bronx Zoo out to Oklahoma to turn
them loose. Like that's how bad it got.
Uh and even today, like we we really
haven't recovered the we've saved them
from genetic extinction. So there's
about, you know, there's about a half
million in existence. 94% of them are
privately owned. What we haven't saved
them from is ecological extinction. Um,
of all American wildlife, of all Native
American wildlife, grizzly bears, black
bears, elk, big horn sheep, on and on
and on,
the buffalo, the bison, is the only
animal that does not have the rights of
a wild animal. If a buffalo walks off of
national park and comes into Montana, he
becomes livestock. He becomes the author
under the authority of the Department of
Livestock. They we do not accept them as
wild animals anymore, which in in my
view is a great sin.
This is one of those episodes where Joe
and I are just looking at each other
going wow and interesting over and over
again.
>> Also, like we could go for like three or
four hours on this conversation.
>> Easy. But we can't. Uh so I'm going to
take us up to I guess modern times. So
when we were talking earlier about the
Long Hunters, we discussed there's
clearly this element of democracy and
independence embedded in that particular
system. And if you look at the way the
modern hunting world, I guess, or system
is structured, it feels like we're
trying to, you know, we're trying to
solve that tension between people's
rights to hunt animals and the
conservation public resource aspect. Is
that right?
>> Yeah, that that's a good way of putting
it. We we live under now when I say we
in this case I mean American hunters,
American fishermen.
We live under uh a very complex
regulatory structure which is which is
self-made. Um our community, you know,
modern American sportsmen
have built the system that we live under
a very very tight tightly regulated
pursuit.
um we've come up with this this system.
Earlier we talked about how things were
in Europe in colonial period. We now
refer to that with some disdain as the
European model where um a land owner
owns the wildlife on their land. They
control the wildlife on their land. We
came up with a system where American
wildlife
is owned by the American people. Um,
administered on your behalf by fish and
game agencies and and and by
governmental entities. But a a wild
American wildlife is American property.
It doesn't matter whose land it's on.
That has allowed us the ability to have
a governing structure
to control harvest for sustainability
because the state and in some cases the
federal government has authority over
the animals. Meaning you could have a
big property and it has deer on it but
those deer are not yours to decide what
you want to do with the deer belong to
the people. You own the land.
>> Yep.
>> Talk to us a little bit about the
contemporary market. I I my my my guess
is it's booming. I don't mean literally
the volume of hunting that's going on,
although I bet that's but like in your
industry, in your world, outdoorsman
media, people buying gear for all this
stuff. I my gut says that this is a hot
area of the economy.
>> Oh, it's Yeah. I mean, we have a huge
economic impact. I mean, you know, you
have 14 million
uh, you know, in any given year, 13 or
14 million Americans will will buy a
hunting license to go hunt. Over twice
as many people will buy a fishing
license to go fish. It generates
billions of dollars in economic
activity, but most of that economic
activity is around gear and experiences,
right? It's not economic activity about
trading in
>> trading deer. And it's also it's also
growing really fast, I take it. Or like
what kind of growth have you seen?
>> It really spiked. No, it's remarkably
stable. It really spiked during the
pandemic, you know, obviously as people
turn to, you know, making sourdough
bread and
>> cooking venison.
>> Back to the lab.
>> There was spikes. It's it's remarkably
stable.
>> There are two types of Americans. There
are sour sourdome Americans and they
live in cities and then venison
Americans.
>> That's right.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
>> Actually, that reminds me. So, one of
the things that I took from the Long
Hunter series is that gear is really
important because you guys talk so much
about the gear that the colonists and
pioneers actually had. So, you know,
there is I I feel like there's an
element of consumerism in the hunting
community where people just collect guns
and knives and things.
>> Oh, for sure. Like me and my buddies, I
mean to be honest with you, when we're
sitting around, you know, and I hang a
lot I hang out with a lot of people
involved in the conservation movement.
Um me and my buddies when we're sitting
around, we mostly argue about gear. Um I
came up with media, but our company, we
have an we have a hunting apparel brand,
we have a game call brand, we have a
hunting decoy brand, um we have a
hunting accessory brand. So yeah, I mean
like gear is it can't be separated out
in the same way Boon was adamant about
what kind of hat he wore, I'm pretty
adamant about what hat I wear and and
that is like the economic activity
today, you know, is in large measure
equipment and gear. And what's beautiful
about it, and I want to throw this in,
what's beautiful about it is that's how
we fund conservation. So we have our
industry in the 30s, we put ourselves
under a 13% excise tax. So when you buy
guns or ammunition,
all guns, it doesn't care any gun
purchase, guns, ammunition, sporting
equipment, there's a anywhere from 11 to
13% excise tax, which goes right into
conservation spending. You go find me
another industry that has anything
comparable to that. It does not exist.
And then our agencies that manage
wildlife in America, all 50 states have
a fish and wildlife agency. Their
funding comes from licenses, permits,
and stamps paid by hunters and anglers.
We're a self-funded
group of Americans.
>> It makes sense, right? Most industries
don't voluntarily want to be taxed on
everything. But when you think about the
fact that there needs to be some
resources to sustain the possibility of
hunting for generations to come, it is
sort of makes sense that this would be
an industry in which you want there to
be some sort of price of entry. If I
became a hunter this winter, would you
make fun of me? Like would I be one of
like those guys who it's like, "Okay,
it's my first season hunting. I'm gonna
buy the most expensive rifle. I'm gonna
buy the most expensive hat. I'm gonna
buy the uh most expensive shoes. You
must have a name like those types. And
they like show up on the hunt with you
and it's clear they like went through
all the lists and just like bought the
top. Yeah. Like the sort of like
wannabes. It's like their first thing
and the they just go down the line and
buy them the they deck themselves out in
the top of the line gear.
>> The name I have for those people is my
buddies. Um, not I'm telling you, not a
year goes by, man. Not a year goes by
that I don't take um out friends,
family, whoever, people that are
interested in hunting, curious about
hunting, even sometimes uneasy with
hunting that I don't take them out and
kind of explain the world. I have three
young kids. Um, I I've been lucky to
turn them all into in into, you know,
avid hunters and we share that. So, no,
I like I like sharing this world. It's a
world I care a lot about. Um, I care
about how it's perceived. Most Americans
don't hunt. Um, in some states like
California and New Jersey, you know,
1% of the population hunts. So, in some
ways, we live and exist um with the
blessing of the American public in
general. So, it's important to me for
people to understand what we're up to,
how we think, and and and that we're
willing to recognize the sins of our
forefathers, and and have gone out of
our way to correct those sins.
>> This is a slight tangent, but since
we're on the subject of conservation,
I'd be curious to get your thoughts, but
what do you think about commercial
hunting of endangered animals? So things
like lions or I don't know bison um
buffalo of some sort in Africa because
one argument I've heard is that these
animals at the moment basically have
negative value, right? Because they're
living on land that you can't use for
anything else because you have to
conserve it because you need to protect
the animals. But if you allow commercial
hunting in a controlled way, you
basically put an economic value on that
animal such that you know it becomes
something that people want to maintain
and preserve and stick around.
>> Yeah. I I would first want to just
clarify I don't mean to be a difficult
guess but um you know be careful using
the word endangered because it can be
you know well I when I say that like in
the US we have the endangered species
act we have a way that we formally
declare things to be endangered I think
in the American imagination Africa's far
away we look we hear the word endangered
and it's not really open to certain
levels of nuance about where and What
for instance elk right here in the
United States um we have robust
populations of elk across the American
West. We have hunting seasons for elk.
We have open hunting seasons for elk.
But elk have only been restored
across about 20% of their native range.
Michigan was elk country. Wisconsin was
elk country. Virginia was elk country.
Elk have been wiped out of those places
and not restored. So you might say,
"Well, elk are endangered because
they're not in Michigan and Wisconsin in
appreciable numbers. Yet in the American
West, in some places we have a problem
with too many elk. So you got to be
careful with words like that. But to get
to the core of your question,
yes, uh it is possible. There are places
in Africa um and I'm not a subject
matter expert on Africa. um like I am
I'm a subject matter expert on these
issues in in the United States but in
Africa there are situations where money
like value to hunters is able to put so
much value on wildlife that the wildlife
becomes worth protecting. Meaning people
that are on the landscape will recognize
the presence of wildlife generates so
much economic activity that it's best
not to kill it all off
um for use as bush meat or or other
applications or because it's a or
because it's a crop pest or because it's
dangerous to livestock. They'll
recognize that hey that lion that
thing's worth 60,000 bucks. Half that
money is coming to our village. Don't
mess with that lion. I mean, that just
happens. Whether you, however you feel
emotionally about the killing of lion,
lions, that's an economic reality in
some places.
>> I feel like don't mess with lions is
just good advice, right?
>> Yeah.
>> One last question. You mentioned bear
meat. Um, I haven't had that much wild
game in my life. I've had or game meat.
I've had um you know sausage with
venison and pork and like when I was out
in Jackson Hole, I went to some
restaurant and you know tried a few
different like mini steaks of
>> Yeah, but that wasn't even wild game.
That's just farm raised that's
farmraised animals.
>> What's uh what should I try that I've
probably never tried before. What I like
meat a lot. So what would I like out out
there?
>> Some of my favorites um really uh you
know malor duck. So, if you're in a
park, you see that duck where the male
has the the the iridescent green head.
When you get those that have been in one
place a while and haven't migrated
lately and they're getting on crops,
they're getting in grain fields. One of
my all-time favorite things. This is
going to sound weird, but true. Um,
squirrel properly done would kind of
blow your mind. And it's partly the fun
of it. like because you have a
preconceived notion of what it would be
like and then when you taste it you'd
think I cannot believe that's that
would kind of blow you away. Um and I
think that you would be very very
surprised if you had a bare pot roast in
a classic fashion with root vegetables,
you know, um and a good broth. I think
you would also say like I I'm I I refuse
to accept that that's what it is and I
wouldn't accept it had I not seen it
happen.
>> I'd love I I I want a bear pot roast
right now.
>> I'll bring you some venison ragu. That's
what I've been making so far. Although,
one thing I learned is that the fat
content of venison is actually really
low. So, it's not very good for making
things like burgers and
>> Yeah. You got to mix it with something.
It's very waxy.
>> Yeah. It has uh it's it it melts
differently than beef fat. So, it sets
up in the inside of your mouth and it
doesn't freeze well. So, if you want to
freeze when you get your venison from
your hunter and you want to enjoy it for
the next year, trim the fat away. Trim
the tallow away. And if you do that,
it's basically archival once you put it
in your freezer. If you leave that
tallow on it, it's not that tallow will
turn even in your freezer.
>> Interesting.
>> Okay. My last question is, what would
you recommend I make with venison?
I would start out by making the things
that you like the most that are easiest
to make. Like you mentioned, um, uh, a
ragu, uh, making hamburgers, ma making
things that you're comfortable making
that, uh, aren't aren't overly complex
and don't have too many steps, just so
you can go and and find these kind of
like points of comparison. If you if you
and your family, if in the summer you
like to grill burgers, like you like to
grill up beef burgers, grill up a
venison burger. um follow the same basic
steps and just kind of get comfortable
with the way it's a little different.
And when you do that enough, you'll come
to prefer it. My wife, like my wife
doesn't hunt, man. My wife doesn't like
domestic meat. Um she doesn't like the
taste of domestic meat because for the
last 20 years, she's eaten nothing but
game meat. She's gotten where she don't
like it. She doesn't want to eat it.
>> We're going to have to wrap this
conversation up even though, as we
mentioned before, we could go on for
hours.
>> Steve Reinella, thank you so much for
coming on OddLots. That was a blast.
>> That was really fun.
>> A blast. Hey, thank you for having us.
Good one,
>> Joe. That was so fun.
>> That was so fun. I don't know anything
about that, but like I could have we
could have talked for three hours.
There's so many things I'm curious about
now. Uh
>> it is underappreciated. I think the role
of hunting in America's economic
development and it's intertwining. I
didn't even know this about with the
industrial revolution.
>> I didn't know about that either. It's
exactly what I was going to say. I would
have had no idea. And it's always sort
of fascinating to think like you can't
run a big factory if you don't have
belts. Now granted, according to
Stephen, there were other sources of
leather, but it's so interesting to
think about like here is this thing that
if you don't have an access to like one
commodity or whatever, you know, there's
a new book, by the way, out about rope
that I want to have. And it's like a
similar story about how crucial rope
was. Anyway, it was so it was so
fascinating.
>> Uh, you know, he mentioned squirrel meat
at the end. So again, I'm I'm just
throwing out tidbits that I learned from
his series, but you know, you can't
really shoot a squirrel if you're going
to eat it because they're so small.
>> The bullet like rips off all the meat.
So the way the pioneers used to do it
apparently is they would shoot at the
tree
>> that the squirrel was on and sort of
like shock the squirrel to death and it
would fall out of the tree and then you
can eat it. Wait, Tracy, can I ask you
is a question is sort of non-politically
correct. Um, is it true that Germans
can't pronounce the word squirrel?
>> Yes. Yes. Okay.
>> I've heard this before.
>> My personal experience when I was a kid,
I used to ask my uncle to say squirrel
all the time just for laughs. And the
way he says it is squirrel. And yeah, he
struggles with it.
>> I just want an excuse to could you see
if this was confirmed or denied?
>> Okay, now that we're talking about
squirrels, shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> All right. This has been another episode
of the All Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway. You can follow me at Tracy
Aloway.
>> And I'm Jill Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our guest
Steven Reanella. He's at Steven
Reanella. Follow our producers Carmen
Rodriguez at Carmen Dashel Bennett at
Dashbot and Kellbrooks at Kellbrooks.
>> And you should definitely check out our
daily newsletter. You can find that at
bloomberg.com/odlotss.
>> And you can chat about all of these
topics 247 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlotss.
And if you enjoyed this episode, this
video, please leave a comment or like,
or better yet, subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching.
[music]
[singing]